Imagine there's a hotel with infinite
rooms.
They're numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on
forever. This is the Hilbert Hotel, and
you are the manager. Now, it might seem
like you could accommodate anyone who
ever shows up, but there is a limit. A
way to exceed even the infinity of rooms
at the Hilbert Hotel. To start, let's
say only one person is allowed in each
room, and all the rooms are full. There
are an infinite number of people in an
infinite number of rooms. Then, someone
new shows up, and they want a room. But,
all the rooms are occupied. So, what
should you do? You get on the PA, and
you tell all the guests to move down a
room. So, the person in room one moves
to room two, the one in room two moves
to room three, and so on down the line.
And now, you can put the new guest in
room one. If a bus shows up with a
hundred people, you know exactly what to
do. Just move everyone down a hundred
rooms, and put the new guests in their
vacated rooms.
But now, say a bus shows up that is
infinitely long, and it's carrying
infinitely many people. You think about
it for a minute, and then come up with a
plan.
You tell each of your existing guests to
move to the room with double their room
number. So, the person in room one moves
to room two, room two moves to room
four, room three to room six, and so on.
And now, all of the odd-numbered rooms
are available. And you know there are an
infinite number of odd numbers, so you
can give each person on the infinite bus
a unique odd-numbered room. And then,
all of a sudden, more infinite buses
show up. Not just one or two, but an
infinite number of infinite buses. You
pull out an infinite spreadsheet. You
make a row for each bus, bus one, bus
two, bus three, and so on, and a row at
the top for all the people who are
already in the hotel. The columns are
for the position each person occupies.
So, you've got hotel room one, hotel
room two, hotel room three, etc. And
then, bus one seat one, bus one seat
two, bus one seat three, and so on.
So, each person gets a unique
identifier, which is a combination of
their vehicle and their position in it.
So, how do you assign the rooms?
We'll start in the top left corner and
draw a line that zigzags back and forth
across the spreadsheet, going over each
unique ID exactly once. Then, imagine
you pull on the opposite ends of this
line, straightening it out.
So, we've gone from an infinite by
infinite grid to a single infinite line.
It's then pretty simple just to line up
each person on that line with a unique
room in the hotel. So, everyone fits, no
problem.